+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "September 11, 2019 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Meeting Notes"
  weight = 953
+++

## September 11, 2019 [Slides](https://cvpia-meeting-slides.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/CVPIA+SIT+Sept+11+2019+Call+In+Meeting+Slides.pdf)

## By phone: 
Bruce McLaughlin, Cesar Blanco, Mike Berry, Carl Dealy, Priscilla Liang, Mike Urkov, Sadie Gill, Brian Ellrott, John Kelly, Robyn Bilski, Chris Hammersmark, Matt Brown, Mark Tompkins, Corey Phillis, Brett Harvey, Cathy Marcinkevage, Tricia Bratcher, JD Wikert, Erica Meyers, Mike Beakes, Rod Wittler, Jim Peterson, Adam Duarte


## Status of watershed expert meetings (Mike U.)
* Ten people in Lodi, focus is getting everyone up to speed on SIT process, spent bulk of time running through documentation and tools developed by Sadie and her crew to try to foster participation and improve a lot of the inputs that we’ve developed and documented that goes into the model
* A lot of talk on what is and not in the model, where documentation is, how folks can participate to improve the process
* Sacramento, Red Bluff, and Santa Cruz (NOAA) to repeat same routine
* Chris Hammersmark: Keep in loop for Santa Cruz meeting
* We’ve talked conceptually about doing similar meetings, different emphasis to other stakeholders and water and power customers, TBD. 
* Not eliciting information on the spot, more to show folks where information is that we’re using. Encouraging people who have information on unique watersheds to start dialogue.
* Bruce: water and power are still interested
* Matt, Caesar, Erica--extend invitation for expert outreach meetings, plus SIT list


## A review and discussion of the CPAR list (All)
* List that was sent out was accidentally filtered. We will send unfiltered spreadsheet for additional comments by COB September 19th
* Way to post CPAR list on SIT website? 
* Rod: the CPAR list is outstanding from 2009, and it’s been what everybody has officially been working towards. Now looking to partially/wholly replacing it with stuff from Near Term Restoration Strategy
* List includes projects that were completed, ongoing, and not completed/not ongoing. 
* Not including completed projects in CPAR list we’re sending out

## Habitat change through time
* Apply stop-gap to dam regulated tributaries
* Rationale for habitat change is based on some data Rod provided
* Rod: one ton per 9sq ft/yd of habitat, 12 sq/ft per cubic yard
* Information derived from American / Sacramento / Clear Creek
* Chris H - is it possible to get an estimate from John Hannon?
* Mike B to check in with John Hannon
* Model will indicate how sensitive the result is to the accuracy of the gravel estimate
* Mark identified dam regulated and not dam regulated (Habitat Change Tributaries)

## Update on state-dependent Chinook strategies (Jim and Adam)
* Reminder that policies have been developed for these groupings of watersheds (see slides), based on where you are spatially as well as increase/decrease of stable habitat over time
* Intent to make development quicker and more thorough


## New Business
* Science Coordinator has made through classification, then back to HR. Maybe an announcement within several weeks
* In person meeting on the calendar?
* Updates on subgroups?
    1. Diversion work EBMUD
    2. Strategy builder
    3. Predation studies
    4. Fish on floodplain 
    5. Habitat decay
    6. Food for fish
    7. Temperature
* After Near-term Restoration Strategy, need to be learning from projects and updating model accordingly. Need pre / post monitoring recommendations.
* [CPAR for DSM Evaluation](https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/11olnEplMbjAmdR5C62nAqk_BRE_h9GDagJFxmJkuOKE/edit?usp=sharing)