+++
title = "Conference Call"

date = 2018-12-05T13:51:56-08:00
# lastmod = 2018-09-09T00:00:00

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "July 08, 2020 (conference call)"
[menu.meetings]
  parent = "Meeting Notes"
  weight = 943
+++

## July 08, 2020 [Slides](https://cvpia-meeting-slides.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/CVPIA+SIT+July+2020+call+in+meeting+slides.pdf)

## By Phone: 
Brett Harvey, Felipe Carrillo, Michael Wright, Mark Tomkins, Megan Cook, Denise Barnard, Emanuel Rodriguez, Dylan Stern, Flora Cordoleani, Heidi Williams, Priscilla Liang, Matt Brown, JD Wikert, Chris Hammersmark, Michael Prowatzke, John Hannon, Alison Collins, Jean Costello, Brian Ellrott, Mandy Banet, Corey Phillis, Susan Strachan, Erica Meyers, Erin Gilligan, Mike Beakes, Kate Spear, Bruce McLaughlin, Scott Petersen, Cyril Michel, Kirk Nelson, John Kelly, Page Vick, Lewis Bear, Elizabeth Shaw, Sadie Gill, Jean Castillo, Mike Urkov, Cesar Blanco, Rod Wittler, Adam Duarte, W Vanderwaal



## Update from subgroups
### Habitat (Tompkins et al.)
* PMT Lead: John Hannon/USBR
* Sub Group members: Mark Tompkins, Chris Hammersmark, Rene Henerey, Rod Wittler, Cesar blanco, Matt Brown, Derek Rupert, Lisa Hunt, Mark Gard, Mike Memeo
* Watershed prioritization split into 4 stages
* Scope of work from December 2022-2025
* Data collection especially in stages 2-4
* Data collection: LiDAR, aerial imagery, substrate mapping (primarily for spawning habitat input updates)
* Modeling: Hydraulics (moving to 2-D if it doesn’t already exist), habitat (will use suitability criteria in an improved way)
* Validation: Observed habitat use (field studies)
* Life cycle model improvements: inundation duration, food production, spatial resolution
 
### WUA to modeled suitability
* Subgroup decided to initiate this transition
* Maturity of data collection approaches and modeling techniques supports “full census”
* New habitat input use suitability criteria as “environmental envelope” (0/1) 
	* a. E.g. suitable depth 0.5-3 feet = 1; other depths = 0


### Habitat decay/change
* Spawning
	* Current approach probabilistic
	* Proposed approach process based (incipient motion/sediment budget)
	* Possible partnership with qualified Central Valley salmonid spawning habitat expert
* Rearing
	* Can increase or decrease
	* Proposed approach process based (incipient motion/sediment budget)
	* Possible partnership with qualified Central Valley salmonid spawning habitat expert       
* Potential to jump start
    * Would require outside funds
	* Pilot analyses on Clear, Upper Sac, American, and Stanislaus 

### Side channel rearing habitats
* Falls under life cycle model improvements task in charter
* Habitat modeling can delineate new habitat types
* But life cycle model would need to change to accommodate “new” habitat types
* Will depend on available data to differentiate survival and growth in these habitat types


### Ephemeral tributaries


### Monitoring
### Clarification on demographic information needs (Jim and Adam et al.)
* Adam and Jim drafted a draft document
	* Purpose
	* Justification and Background
	* Implementation 
	* General requirements      
* Subgroup met to discuss draft document on May 14th
	* Participants: Cesar, Rod, John H., Mike B., Mike U., Jim, and Adam
	* Further review provided by Brian Ellrott, Rachel Johnson, Bryan Matthias, and others    at USFWS Lodi Office
	* [Final document](https://drive.google.com/file/d/18Yq78ealLWyEaGiM6tnGdcKKx6BCrzxC/view) sent to USFWS and BOR on May 19th 

### Process moving forward (Cesar, Heather, and Rod)

### Food and fish (Rene and Rod)
* Have idea to utilize results from study, has to do with growth rates
* Working on SIT proposal, planning on September goal, should provide feedback to two groups that are working on this topic
* Whole purpose is to be able to analyze food for fish as potential management action for CVPIA in the future
* Idea is floodplain is disconnected from mainstem, hypothesis is mainstem is depleted of food most of the time because there is no food delivered to mainstem. Augment mainstem with food from floodplain during periods of time when juvenile fish are out migrating. What this does is it increases food availability in mainstem to levels that are theorized to level of floodplain. 

### Hatchery operations (Rod)
* Need to identify what stage things are being introduced
* Using information from tag data reports comes up every year as a point we can do a better job at

### New CalSim runs (Mike Urkov)
* Think baseline we’ve been using for DCMs may change because of the new biological opinion
* New CalSIM runs may be new standard towards the end of the year, if that happens, would propose to swap current baseline for hydrology in DCM with that, would review sequence of years for 20-year simulation

### Data Guidance/EDI/FAIR (Sadie)
* FAIR data principles: finadable, accessible, interoperable, reusable
* EDI (Environmental Data Initiative) trusted NSF funded data repository
* EML (Ecological Metadata Language) metadata standards
* EML is pretty unique, FlowWest will be helping everyone to make sure there is good formatting for upload
* FlowWest as data managers for CVPIA, work closely with CVPIA researchers to ensure data and metadata meet standardized protocols
* EDI Workflow Status: developing metadata template for CVPIA, developing R package EML tools
* Metadata Questions: CVPIA projects’ controlled vocabulary? Taxonomy lookup? CVPIA Funder Identifier Registration? Intellectual Rights and Licensing? 

## Update on Chinook Salmon DSMs

### Code release (Jim and Adam)
* See slides

### Code modifications (Sadie and Emanuel)
* We can use GitHub
* Code refractor: like spring cleaning- restructuring existing code without changing its external behavior 
* Results: faster, easier to maintain and expand, documented using R docs 
* What’s next: release, documentation website, more automated calibration and sensitivity analysis procedures- dependent on direction from reclamation

### Late fall run (Jim and Adam)
* Have set up the timing and inputs
* Waiting to calibrate until habitat amounts and code modifications are finalized

### Winter run DSM inputs (FlowWest)
* Proposal Matt submitted
* Next step is to sit down with Matt and determine where we expect winter-run to be 
* Pretty close to ready


### Near-term Restoration Strategy
#### Finalization process (Mike Urkov)
* How does prioritizations developed in Strategy get transferred to implementation agencies
* Finalizing means to transfer to USBR and USFWS
* 5-year Strategy intended to have an annual review. In past, loosely called tech memo, would include modifications or refinements to Strategy
* Strategy cover begins in FY 21, annual calendar we’re walking into now should have that annual tech memo available hopefully by early FY21

### New Business

#### Predation/ALAN (Alison and Corey)
* UCSC/NOAA and MWD have discussed creating a map of Artificial Light at Night (ALAN) across the Central Valley for use in the SIT model
* Measures of ALAN do not exist for the full extent of the basins considered by SIT
* Propose to develop a qualitative map layer to identify high and low areas of nighttime illumination on waterways using VIIRS satellite data

#### Delta Science Update (Dylan Stern)

#### Sutter Bypass project update (Flora)

#### USFWS/USBR Updates

#### Next Steps
