+++
title = "CVPIA SDM Meetings"

draft = false  # Is this a draft? true/false
toc = true  # Show table of contents? true/false
type = "docs"  # Do not modify.

# Add menu entry to sidebar.
linktitle = "Overview"
[menu.meetings]
weight = 1 
+++

## Welcome

The primary focus of the project is to identify potential data, compile and provide access to appropriate data, and develop analytical models consistent with CVPIA fish doubling goals within the framework of Structured Decision Making. This effort will be coordinated and revised with the resource agencies and stakeholders. It is anticipated that agency and stakeholder representatives will provide the majority of the biological expertise and institutional knowledge.

Biological expertise and institutional knowledge is transferred to the SDM process through a series of regularly-scheduled conference calls and in-person meetings. Records of previous meetings are available for review. 
## Calendar 

<iframe src="https://calendar.google.com/calendar/embed?showTitle=0&amp;height=600&amp;wkst=1&amp;bgcolor=%23ffffff&amp;src=cvpiadsm%40gmail.com&amp;color=%231B887A&amp;ctz=America%2FLos_Angeles" style="border-width:0" width="800" height="600" frameborder="0" scrolling="no"></iframe>

[Download Calendar for Outlook](https://cvpia-meeting-slides.s3-us-west-2.amazonaws.com/basic+(1).ics)

## Upcoming Meeting
**Location:** Conference Call        
**Date:** March 18, 2020 (10 AM- 12 PM)        
**[Join Zoom meeting](https://oregonstate.zoom.us/j/3670272302)**    
Meeting ID: 367 027 2302  

## Agenda    
1. Update on Science Coordinator position hire (Cesar)      
2. Review SIT 2020 Schedule (Adam/Jim)      
3. Update on the Near-term Restoration Strategy
    1. Timeline for release (Cesar, Heather, and Rod)
    2. Process for implementation (Cesar, Heather, and Rod)
    3. Update on Chinook Salmon DSM model archiving (Adam, Jim, and Mike U.)
4. Reminder of subgroups, tasks, and group membership with expected larger report out at April 2020 meeting (Mike U.)
    1. Predator Contact Points and Prevalence - Cyril, Alison, and Corey
    2. Update hatchery operations and returns - Rod
    3. Food Growth (Temperature & Food Effect on Juvenile Growth)
        1. Food for Fish I - Brett and Rene/Jacob
        2. Food for Fish II - Rene/Jacob
    4. Habitat Estimates and change
        1. Winter run DSM inputs for battle Creek - Matt/FlowWest
        2. Habitat change - Rod
        3. Incorporate side channel rearing habitats into DSMs - Mike Berry
        4. Incorporate ephemeral triburaries into DSMs - Mike Berry
        5. New CALSIM - Mike U. 
5. Discuss expectations for April 2020 In-person meeting (All)
    1. Subgroup report out
    2. Implementation and monitoring results from the Sacramento River (Mandy B. and Susasn S.)
6. New Business (All)